

--- PAGE 1 ---
 
THE 
Concord, New Hampshire, March 3, 1992 based on sketch by Bob Dix, Union Leader, Manchester, NH 
   
 
Donald A. Johnson, Ph.D. 
with 
David R. Saunders, Ph.D. 
 
USER'S GUIDE 
 
UFOCAT 2023 
Copyright © 2023, Donald A. Johnson, Ph.D.
J.Allen Hynek Center for UFO Studies 
 
April 2023 
 
Published by: 
Sun River Research Institute, 16 Old Woodhill Rd., Bow, NH 03304-4906 
Tel. 603-774-3040 Fax. 603-774-3072 


--- PAGE 2 ---
 Page 1  
  


--- PAGE 3 ---
 Page 2 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Page
 
 Introduction 4 
  Scope of Database 5 
  Structure of the Database 6 
  Availability 6 
  Inputs to UFOCAT 2002 7 
  Blanks or Errors in the Database 7 
  Organization of this User’s Guide 8   
 Outline of Typical UFOCAT 2002 Record (Table 1) 9 
 Source Information 
  Primary Record Number 11 
  Handedness - "X2" 11 
  Indirect Record Number 11 
  Relationship between PRN and IRN - "X1" 11 
  UFOCAT 2002 Record Number  11 
  Author’s or Investigator’s Name 11 
  Level of Entry of Source 12 
  Name of Direct Source 12 
  Codes for Level of Entry (Table 2) 13 
  Within Source ID (“PAGEVOL” Field) 14 
   Indirect Source 15 
 Date of Sighting  
  Year, Month and Day 16 
  Time 17 
  Flag Field for Date/Time 18 
  Time Zone 19 
 Weather 20 
 Location Information  
  Local Terrain 21 
  Special Location of Witness(es) 22 
  Location Field (City, Town or Village) 22 
  Special Location of the Phenomenon 23 
  Region Field 24 
  State Field 24 
  County Field 25  
 Witness Information  
  Number of Witnesses 25 
  Age of Principal Witness 25 
  Sex of Principal Witness 26 
  Special Codes for Witnesses (Police, Military, etc.) 26 
  Names of Witnesses 27 


--- PAGE 4 ---
 Page 3  
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED) 
 Page 
 
 Absolute Sidereal Time 27  
 Hynek Classification Code 28 
 Vallee Classification Code 29 
 SVP Credibility Code 30 
 Type of Report 31 
  Sub-Type of Reports 32 
  Key to Sub-Type Codes 32 
 Explainability of Report 36 
 Explanation Field 37 
 
 UFO Characteristics 
  Number of Objects 38 
  Duration of Observation 38 
  Size of Object(s) 39 
  Apparent or Angular Size 40 
  Distance from UFO(s) 41 
  Color of UFO(s) 42 
  Shape of UFO(s) 43 
  Sound from UFO(s) 44 
 Geographical Coordinates 45 
 Notes  46 
 User Defined Field 46 
 
 
Appendix A List of Reference Sources 47 
 
Appendix B  UFOCAT 2002 Country Codes and Names 63 
 
Appendix C UFOCAT 2002 States and World Regions 67 


--- PAGE 5 ---
 Page 4 
  
                    
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
“As a bibliography of raw UFO reports, UFOCAT is without peer.” 
-- Allan Hendry, The UFO Handbook, 1979 
 
 UFOCAT 2002 refers to a computer database of over 120,000 UFO reports and related 
information released in April 2002.  It is the result of a 30-year effort that began during the Air 
Force sponsored Colorado UFO Project, also known as the “Condon Committee.”  UFOCAT 
was begun by Dr. David R. Saunders, who at the time was a co-Principal Investigator on the 
Colorado UFO study and professor of Psychology at the University of Colorado
1.  Dr. Jacques 
Vallee contributed a large computer catalogue of approximately 6,000 cases at the project’s 
inception. 
 
 The UFOCAT database has existed in some form or another since the spring of 1967 
but went through an eight-year hiatus from 1982 to 1990 when it was neither updated nor 
utilized.  In 1976 Dr. Saunders gave his version of UFOCAT to the Center for UFO Studies 
(CUFOS).  From then until 1982 it was maintained and updated by Fred Merritt at the Chicago 
office of CUFOS.  In those days the database was kept on a large IBM mainframe computer at 
a nearby computer facility, with magnetic tape backup.  It eventually proved to be too 
expensive an endeavor for the Center to mainta in on a mainframe, and consequently it was 
removed from active use and stored on tape.  
 
 In 1990 I obtained a copy of UFOCAT on ten 3.5" diskettes from Dr. Saunders courtesy 
of Dr. John Derr of the U.S. Geological Survey.  Dr. Derr had created the diskette version from 
one of the magnetic tape backups for his research use.  Unfortunately he was unable to read 
the first portion of the tape and so we were missing the first 10,000 records. Mark Rodeghier, 
Director of CUFOS, provided me with an older magnetic tape backup copy of UFOCAT.  By 
merging the two sources of data I was able to recreate the catalogue as it existed in 1982.  
Since then several tens of thousands of additional records have been added. UFOCAT99 was 
first released in the Autumn of 1999 with over 111,000 records, and the current UFOCAT 2002 
version has over 146,000 records. 
 
 With the great strides made in recent years in computer software and hardware 
technology, and with the substantial reduction in costs of computer RAM memory and disk 
storage, it made sense to revise the UFOCAT file structure.  First using dBase IV and later 
Microsoft Access 97 the file was converted to a modern relational database.  Most of the 
single-letter codes from the 1970’s version were replaced with longer, more understandable 
names.  Several fields were added.  A special emphasis was placed on improving the 
identification of the source for each UFO report, including the full name of the author and a 
much longer mnemonic code for the reference citation. 
 
 In the late 1970s and early 1980s several researchers prominent in the UFO field 
criticized the use of UFOCAT for conducting research.  Perhaps foremost among these critics 
 
1 As a Condon Committee member, David Saunders was a proponent for taking the UFO phenomenon seriously. 
Dr. Edward U. Condon dismissed him from the study for releasing the infamous Low memorandum.  In the memo 
project administrator Robert Low wrote “the trick would be to…[convince] the public it would appear a totally 
objective study…but to the scientific community would present the image of a group of nonbelievers…having an 
almost zero expectation of finding a saucer.”  Saunders  wrote his response to the Condon whitewash in his book 
UFOs? Yes! Where the Condon Committee Went Wrong.  (Signet, 1968). 
 
 


--- PAGE 6 ---
 Page 5  
  
were Allan Hendry and Dr. Willy Smith.  While we agree that many of these criticisms were 
indeed valid, we disagree with the central premise that it is impossible to use UFOCAT 2002 to 
conduct meaningful research.  
 
 We would first caution potential users not to expect to be able to begin and end their 
research using only UFOCAT 2002—there are too many gaps in the data and, just like the 
Internet, not every source of information is as reliable and accurate as the next.  The results 
obtained from UFOCAT 2002 are best thought of as a reference guide to the original sources 
for the crucial details.  Otherwise, the distinction between poorly investigated reports and 
exhaustively studied sightings will be lost.  However, you will substantially improve your search 
for information by accessing UFOCAT 2002.  What was true when Allan Hendry wrote his 
critique of UFOCAT in 1979 is even truer today: UFOCAT 2002 is without peer as a reference 
source. Thousands of hours went into creating it, and months have gone into revising it to 
improve its ease of use.  It exists today as the most comprehensive reference tool and 
bibliographic source on UFO reports in existence. 
 
Scope of the Database
 
 The UFOCAT 2002 database exists as a set of MS Access97 tables, queries, forms, 
and reports.  The database requires approximately 50 megabytes of disk storage space.  In 
addition to the main table, three smaller tables contain expanded information about country 
names and region codes ( WORLD); U.S. county names, U.S. county census data and 
geographical coordinates (COUNTIES); and additional bibliographic information about sources 
referenced by UFOCAT 2002 (SOURCES). 
 
 The basic unit of the UFOCAT 2002 is the record.  Physically, a record consists of 49 
fields. Forty-one of the fields are defined as char acter strings. Eight fields are numeric fields: 
PRN, IRN, URN, X2, TZONE, AST, SIZE, and DIST.  Dates are defined as character strings in 
order to include characterizations when the precise date or time is unknown, such as “Night” or 
“Dawn.” 
 
 Most entries in the UFOCAT 2002 describe UFO events, but some non-UFO events 
have been included.  In the past these non-UFO events have included such things as nuclear 
test explosions, aircraft crashes, major electrical power failures, and the deaths of major UFO 
figures. Also included are the dates that crop circle markings or other unusual traces were 
discovered.  These non-UFO events are distinguishable by having a first-digit code of zero (0) 
for TYPE.  To the extent that they have potential ufological interest, other non-UFO events 
may also be eligible for inclusion in the future. 
 
 Typically, each record for a UFO event reflects the input of one witness or group of 
witnesses about one event as reported via one source; in practice, there is unavoidable 
confounding of both witnesses and events, and sources are not always unambiguous. As a 
basic principle, UFOCAT 2002 has aimed to include any reasonable class of material deemed 
to be of interest. A closely related principle established in the earlier versions of UFOCAT was 
that a given record should accurately reflect the data 
as given by its source, even when those 
data are known to be inaccurate. This rule still holds with some exceptions. Some exceptions 
to this rule in UFOCAT 2002 have been made when the inaccuracy would cause a major 
misreading of the report. In addition, spelling errors in place names or witness names of only a 
single letter or two have been corrected because they are inconsequential, and it allows the 
user to distinguish mistakes that are flagged as truly erroneous errors. Special codes are used 
to flag data suspected of inaccuracy or known to be inaccurate. 
 


--- PAGE 7 ---
 Page 6 
  
 The existing UFOCAT 2002 fields and codes will undoubtedly be in need of future 
expansion due to the dynamic nature and complexity of the UFO phenomena. This UFOCAT 
2002 User's Guide is an attempt to describe the structure, content, and coding conventions as 
they currently exist. 
 
Structure of the Database 
 
 With the help of the queries provided with the UFOCAT 2002 database, a block of 
records describing the same event can be obtained.  The entries within each block all refer to 
the same event, but are based on different sources. The chronologically earliest report of a 
given event, or the most complete account available, is treated as the primary record for that 
event. 
 
Availability of the Information Contained in the UFOCAT 2002 Database
 
 UFOCAT 2002 has become a very large database.  David Saunders invested the lion’s 
share of the work, even though his contributions ended in 1976.  Ted Bloecher, Fred Merritt, 
Luis Schoenherr, and Paul Ferrughelli have made noteworthy contributions of material 
specifically coded for UFOCAT 2002, and many others have made data available in diverse 
forms. All of these contributions have helped greatly, but much more work remains.  Some 
UFO investigators have invested a great deal of their personal time with no monetary 
compensation, so their personal wishes regarding the confidentiality and availability of their 
material should be respected. 
 
 One particular problem in this area was resolved by allowing contributors to specify 
"levels of availability" for their material; these specifications lead to codes in the LEVEL field 
for each record.  The codes assigned to published material make them freely available; the 
codes assigned to unpublished material invoke varying degrees of confidentiality, starting with 
the witness names. Contributors who fear inappropriate use of their material can effectively 
"classify" it, and some have elected this option.  Of course, we reserve the right not to accept 
material for UFOCAT 2002 if there are too many strings attached.  Currently, less than 10% of 
the primary records hold back more than witness names and this percentage will be reduced 
in future releases. 
 
 Needless to say, UFOCAT 2002 serves no purpose unless it is used.  Those with a 
scientific interest in the UFO problem and who will, in turn, make their findings freely available 
are welcome to purchase and use this database. However, it is also possible to misuse the 
data.  The major contributors to the file, including CUFOS, have agreed that two general 
restrictions are necessary--a qualitative restriction and a publication restriction. 
 
 The qualitative restriction is implemented by distinguishing between published and 
unpublished sources.  Records based on unpublished sources remain under the control of 
those sources, both as to content and availability. Unpublished entries that do not have the 
author’s approval to release the names of witnesses have been reduced to their initial letter. 
Entries based on published sources have not been censored.  The operational meaning of 
"published" and "unpublished" is contained in the coding of the SOURCE field for each 
UFOCAT 2002 record and is described in detail in this Users' Guide. 
 
 The publication restriction applies to every purchaser and user of the database.  The 
basic intent is that UFOCAT 2002 should be used to further our common understanding of 
ufology, but not for "ulterior" purposes.  All users are expected to honor this intent when it 
comes time to publish.  UFOCAT 2002 is a creative work and as such is protected by 


--- PAGE 8 ---
 Page 7  
  
international copyright laws.  Permission to reproduce or publish material extracted from 
UFOCAT 2002 must be obtained in writing from the author or publisher. 
 
Inputs to UFOCAT 2002
 
 All persons interested in the pursuit of ufology as an interdisciplinary science are 
invited to contribute reports for UFOCAT 2002.  Unique, unpublished investigations file data 
are always welcome.  Citations for material published in book form up through the 1970’s is 
already coded for most of the UFO literature.  Material published in periodical form or in 
newspaper sources and many of the books published since 1980 is only partially coded.
 
Before actually encoding anything, an inquiry is in order.   Write to: Donald A. Johnson, 
Sun River Research, 16 Old Woodhill Road , Bow, NH 03304.  Or you may email 
us at ufocat@aol.com. 
 
 In the case of file material, it is nec essary to devise an appropriate numbering system 
for source identification, so that when UFOCAT 2002 queries are performed the internal 
structure of each source can be preserved.  For source files that are maintained 
chronologically, this is already automatic (i.e. simply number by year, month, day, and time). 
 
 Data entry can be achieved through using the Access97 screen form designed and 
included in the UFOCAT 2002 database. When using the screen form provided to enter new 
material it is not necessary that all fields be entered by you.  It is recommended that the new 
record include those information items that will help to match the record with possible 
duplicates, and determine proper primary record number assignment. 
This includes date, 
time, place, witness name(s), "indirect source", type of report, and the name of 
the author or investigator of the report .  Additional coding will be essential for 
potentially primary entries and for entries based on new investigations. 
 
 In order to maintain quality control, all mergers of new data into the primary version of 
UFOCAT 2002 will continue to be centralized.  Edited submissions will be returned 
electronically to contributors, who may then verify or add to the proposed additions to the 
UFOCAT 2002 catalogue, and email them back.  Such files will include the permanent ID 
numbers assigned by the system.  We expect that material will continue to be prepared for 
UFOCAT 2002 more or less continuously.  We hope that you can expect a short turnaround 
time for your files of new or revised entries, but please keep in mind that this is a volunteer 
effort. 
 
Blanks and/or Errors in the Database
 
 A general principle of coding has been followed that a blank indicates data either 
missing from the report or at least unknown to the person making the entry.  Errors of omission 
can hardly be avoided, but we would like to have any error of commission called to our 
attention--unless it is already flagged as an error of the source. 
 
Organization of this User's Guide 
 
 It is a relatively simple process to create additional tables that include specialized 
detail coding and free format text.  New tables may be relationally linked to UFOCAT 2002 by 
the record ID or the appropriate key.  It is natural, therefore, to order this User's Guide in 
terms of the positions occupied by the fields in the UFOCAT 2002 record.  The internal 


--- PAGE 9 ---
 Page 8 
  
organization therefore parallels the arrangement most often used for generating reports and 
listings. 
 
 As a result of this structure, certain formats are more convenient for data acquisition 
than other formats.  In particular, we recommend that submissions not already in UFOCAT 
2002 format use character strings for the defined fields with the same length as those used in 
UFOCAT 2002.  It is relatively easy to append records into the Access97 database from Excel 
97 spreadsheets provided  the lengths of those fields do not exceed the length described 
herein. The use of "exotic" field types is also discouraged.  A left-to-right rearrangement of the 
fields creates only minor inconvenience. However, the data record of specific codes that do 
not conform to the specifications outlined and detailed on the following pages may present 
much greater difficulties and confusion.  Computer translation of idiosyncratic codes is 
possible, but even so it will be worthwhile only for large files. 
 
 Each page of this User's Guide beyond this introduction is labeled according to the 
position of the described field within a typical event-record.  Table 1, below, outlines the whole 
record and serves as an index.  The structure of the UFOCAT table has changed since the 
last release with the addition of four more fields: Ufonaut, Height, Uniform, and LST.  
Accommodation of other forms of data will occur by employing additional relational databases, 
such as an IMAGES table which is currently under  construction, so that extra records will be 
created only for the cases that need them. 


--- PAGE 10 ---
 Page 9  
  
Table 1: Outline of Typical UFOCAT 2002 Record 
 
Field Width Type of Information
 
PRN N Primary record ID number (indicates first record for that case) 
X2 N Order of primacy for records in a block concerning same incident 
IRN  N Indirect record ID number (blank for primary entries) 
X1  1 Flag for order of entries referring to the same report 
URN  N UFOCAT 2002 record ID number (permanent unique reference number) 
AUTHOR 30 Author's or Investigator's Name 
LEVEL  1 Level of source 
SOURCE 12 Code for identification of the direct source (see Appendix A) 
PAGEVOL  8 Position within source 
ISOURCE 12 Code for identification of the indirect source 
IPAGEVOL  8 Position within indirect source 
YEAR  4 Year 
MO 2 Month 
DAY  2 Day 
TIME  5 Time (Hour and Minute) 
TZ 1 Special flag for reporting accuracy of date and time 
TZONE N Time Zone 
WEA  8 Weather 
TER  8 Terrain (e.g. “forest”) 
VFLG  3 Vehicle Flag (e.g. a period indicates the witness is in a car) 
LOCATION 30 Place-name location 
LFLG  1 Special flag for reporting accuracy about location  
REGION  2 Region of world abbreviation 
STATE  3 State (or country) abbreviation (see Appendix B) 
COUNTY  8 County (or province) 
WITNESSES  8 Number of witnesses 
AGE  2 Age of principal witness or age composition of group 
SEX  1 Sex of principal witness or gender composition of group 
MIS  1 Flag for military or police witnesses 
NAMES 30 Witness name(s) 
AST  N Absolute Sidereal Time (computed) 
HYNEK  3 Hynek classification code 


--- PAGE 11 ---
 Page 10 
  
VALLEE 3 Vallee classification code 
SVP 3 Credibility 
TYPE 12 Type and subtype of report (as indicated by source) 
EXPLN  1 Flag for explainability of the report 
EXPLAN  2 Explanation of report (as given by source) 
OBJS  8 Number of objects (UFOs) reported 
DUR  8 Duration of event 
SIZE  N Size of object estimated by witnesses 
ANGLSIZ  3 Apparent size 
DIST N Distance from UFO at closest approach estimated by witnesses 
COLOR  8 Color of UFO 
SHAPE  8 Shape of UFO 
SOUND 8 Sound (if any) associated with UFO 
LONGITUDE  8 Longitude 
X3  1 Coordinate flags 
LATITUDE  8 Latitude 
NOTES 200 Short narrative of UFO incident including key words 
Ufonaut 16 Classification of type of UFO humanoid/alien reported 
 
Height N Height of Ufonaut reported, in feet 
 
Uniform 16 Description of uniform worn by Ufonaut 
 
LST N Local sidereal time 
 
USER 
DEFINED 
FIELD 32 Field available for User definitions or labels that can be used for custom-
ized searches. Contains Local Sidereal Time (LST) prefixed with "RA" 


--- PAGE 12 ---
 Page 11  
  
FIELD NAME: PRN DATA TYPE: Number 
 
 This field contains the primary record number ("PRN").  It points to the "URN" or 
UFOCAT 2002 record number of the record with the most primary source of information about 
the UFO event.  Filtering records by this number will provide all references to the same event. 
 
FIELD NAME: X2 DATA TYPE: Number 
 
 Despite its cryptic name, this field is one of the most important within the record, 
because it provides information on the "handedness" of the record.  Primary records are 
identified with a zero.  Filtering records for this value is the most common way to find only the 
primary entries for a search, and is used to conduct statistical tallies without double counting 
events. Records coded with a "1" indicate investigations that are based upon an independent 
investigation of the UFO event, but was not chosen as the primary record.  Records coded 
with a "2" reference the primary source or some other source and is therefore a secondary 
source of information. Records coded with a "3" clearly reference only a secondary source, 
and are therefore even further removed from the original report. 
 
FIELD NAME: IRN DATA TYPE: Number 
 
 This field contains the indirect record number ("IRN"). It points to the "URN" or 
UFOCAT 2002 record that is most closely associated with the source. Typically this refers to 
the source cited by the author when he or she is not the primary source. If the author or 
investigator is the primary source then this field will be blank. 
 
 
FIELD NAME: X1 WIDTH: 1 character 
 
 This field is left over from an earlier version of UFOCAT, and expresses the degree of 
confidence the coder had about the strength of the relationship between the URN and the 
IRN.  Primary records will not have an indirect source and this field will be left blank. Clear 
matches are coded with a "=" and possible matches are coded with a "-". 
 
FIELD NAME: URN DATA TYPE: Number 
 
 The UFOCAT 2002 record ID number.  This is a permanent, unique reference number 
assigned to each record in the database.  Every record with have an URN regardless of the 
paucity of other information contained within it. 
 
FIELD NAME: AUTHOR WIDTH: 30 characters 
 
 This field contains the name of the first author or UFO investigator who was 
responsible for writing the report, article, or book from which the record is referenced in the 
SOURCE field.  It is possible that the author is unknown or was not recorded at the time the 
entry was made. This field would then contain the name of the editor of the magazine or 
journal in which the report appeared the name of the magazine or journal, or the name of the 
organization responsible for the report.  The surname of the first author is listed first, followed 
by first name and middle initial, up to 30 characters.  
 
FIELD NAME: LEVEL WIDTH: 1 character 


--- PAGE 13 ---
 Page 12 
  
 
 This field contains a numeric code (0 – 9) for the level of entry of the source (see Table 
2).  Primary sources for a given UFO event will tend to be associated with low-numbered 
codes in this field (source codes of 0 through 3). Type 3 sources (investigation files) are the 
most preferred for additions to the catalogue because they are the most likely to contain the 
most information with the fewest inaccuracies. 
 
 
FIELD NAME: SOURCE WIDTH: 12 characters  
 
 A 12-character abbreviation describes the source of the report.  This field is a unique 
identifier for the source (i.e. an investigations file, a periodical, a book, or a list of UFO 
reports). The SOURCE field is used to match UFOCAT 2002 table entries with descriptive 
information about the source (e.g. title, year of publication, etc) in the SOURCES table.  
Together with the volume number and page citation found in the PAGEVOL field, this code 
should be sufficient to allow the specific source to actually be located in its original form.  
 
 It will normally be true that all entries coded from the same direct source will have the 
same code for level of source.  However, there are a few important exceptions.  Primary 
sources for a given UFO event will tend to be associated with low-numbered codes in the level 
field (source LEVEL codes of 2 or 3).  
 
 If the direct source is an individual the following abbreviation scheme applies. 
Ordinarily, the first column of the field will contain the first letter of the first name (capitalized).  
The second column will contain the first letter of the last name (capitalized), followed by the 
remainder of the last name in lower case, followed by a number if the source is published.  In 
the case where an author has written more than one book, the number code ranks the books 
or published works in order of publication.  In the case of a book with two or more authors, the 
author first mentioned is the one coded. 
 
 A periodical is indicated by its name (up to 12 characters).  A periodical that is the 
work of one author is treated as an individual's publication, with the full name appearing in the 
AUTHOR field. 
 
 


--- PAGE 14 ---
 Page 13  
  
Table 2: Level of Entry 
 
 Specific codes for level of entry of source have the following meanings:   
 
9 The direct source is essentially a list, with no narrative information.  The list may or may 
not have been computerized and/or used in a statistical study by the original compiler.  
Within-source identification numbers are the serial numbers assigned by the original 
compiler, if given (see PAGEVOL Scheme 2). 
 
8 The direct source is a (presumably) revised work. (Cf. 7) This will typically include 
paperback editions and translations.  The content of such editions is rarely novel, but 
the page numbering is often different.  See APPENDIX A: INDEX TO DIRECT 
SOURCES to see what specific edition may have been coded as 8 (see PAGEVOL  
Scheme 1). 
 
7 The direct source is the first edition of a book or monograph, in the native language of 
the author.  Within-source identification numbers are page numbers in this edition (see 
PAGEVOL Scheme 1). 
 
6 The direct source is an author's files.  There is no predictable within-source 
identification (see PAGEVOL Scheme 3 or 5). 
 
5 The direct source is a periodical devoted pr imarily or frequently to ufology.  Within-
source identification codes are based on year and month and page of publication (see 
PAGEVOL Scheme 4). 
 
4 The direct source is a periodical of general circulation, including newspapers and most 
magazines.  Within-source identification codes are based on year, month, and day of 
publication (see PAGEVOL Scheme 5).  (Except for Project Bluebook). 
 
3 The direct source is an investigations file.  Within-source identification schemas vary 
from source to source (see PAGEVOL Scheme 3 or 5 or 6). 
 
2 The direct source is an investigations file.  Witness names are automatically 
confidential, and some detailed data are confidential. 
 
1 The direct source is an investigations file.  The entire case is confidential, and may be 
reported only as a tally in statistical summaries. 
 
0 The direct source is an investigations file.  Status as type 1 or 2 or 3 has not been 
determined. 
 
A blank The record does not refer to an event. 
or any 
alphabetic 
code  
 


--- PAGE 15 ---
 Page 14 
  
FIELD NAME: PAGEVOL WIDTH: 8 characters 
 
Identification within Source
 
 The first seven columns of the PAGEVOL field provides the page number or other 
useful identifying information to enable the user to locate the original documentation from 
which the record has been coded.  A supplementary purpose of the code, when this is 
feasible, is to indicate the date when the coded information became available, so that relative 
dates may be inferred from listings. 
 
 Several types of coding are used, depending on the nature of the overall source.  For 
any one direct source, a consistent scheme of identification will be used, according to the 
following key: 
 
Scheme 1  Page number in a published source. (Level 7 or 8) Letters may be used 
to separate appendices. 
 
Scheme 2  Sequential number in a published source.  (Level 9) 3-4 digits. 
 
Scheme 3  Acquisition numbers.  These are used only in small, unpublished files. 
 
Scheme 4  Year/Month/Page of publication in a level 5 source. This will be the 
preferred scheme for any specialized periodicals that have their own 
specific source codes. The use of issue numbers, although practiced 
widely, is not recommended. Four digits are used for the year plus two 
digits for the month and two digits for the page. 
 
Scheme 5  Year/Month/Day of publication.  This will be the preferred scheme for all 
material derived from chronological files. Four digits are used for year, 2 
digits for month plus 2 digits for day. In the past the letters A through L 
were used as codes for the months, and the letters A through Z were 
used as codes for the day or page number. These codes have been 
replaced with numbers. 
 
Scheme 6  Blank.  Used only in small, unpublished files. 


--- PAGE 16 ---
 Page 15  
  
FIELD NAME: ISOURCE WIDTH: 12 characters  
 
 A 12-character abbreviation describes the indirect source of the report. The "indirect 
source" of any record is the source that is ci ted or credited by the author. This field serves two 
purposes.  First, it provides the essential information by which records referring to the same 
event may be grouped into blocks and primary entries recognized as such.  Second, in the 
case of primary entries, it provides a general indication of the quality of the witness's 
contribution to the original input. 
 
 Any code that appears in SOURCE may appear in ISOURCE when that source is cited 
as an indirect source.  However, the ISOURCE  won’t always to be a unique identifier for the 
indirect source because sometimes the exact details of the reference are vague.  For 
example, it may only refer to a person as the source without citing the publication.   
 
 If the indirect source is an individual the first character in that field will contain the first 
letter of that person’s first name (capitalized).  The second column will contain the first letter of 
the last name (capitalized) followed by the remainder of the last name in lower case. A 
number will follow the name if the citation is to a book by that person.  In the case where an 
author has written more than one book, these numbers rank the books in order of publication. 
In the case of a book with two or more authors, the author first mentioned is the one coded.  If 
more than one source is cited, the most recent one should be treated as the indirect source. 
 
 A periodical is indicated by its name (up to 12 characters).  A periodical that is the 
work of one author is treated as an individual's publication, with the full name appearing in the 
AUTHOR field.  In addition to the codes borrowed from SOURCE , the following miscellaneous 
codes may be given as the indirect source (listed here in order of priority): 
 
 * (Asterisk).  The immediate indirect source for this record is a first-hand written 
report of an on-the-scene investigation written by the investigator or the 
equivalent. 
 
 + (Plus sign).  The indirect source for this record is a standardized report form 
completed by or with the witness for inclusion in the file designated by the 
direct source code. 
 
 ' (Apostrophe).  The indirect source for this record is a description of firsthand 
observations prepared by the witness and reported in a scientific journal. 
 
 . (Period).  Either the indirect source for this record is a letter written by the 
witness(es), or the direct source is based on an unstructured interview with the 
witnesses (as by a newspaper reporter).  The latter interpretation will apply 
when the LEVEL code is 4.  
 
 , (Comma).  The indirect source for this record is a published account in a 
newspaper or other non-scientific periodical.  Note that a comma "," is 
appropriate the SOURCE is a wire-service story.  If the SOURCE is a local 
news story (published in the same county as the event), the last column of 
PAGEVOL should be coded "." on the assumption that the witnesses were 
interviewed. 


--- PAGE 17 ---
YEAR, MONTH, and DAY 
 
 The need for including the chronological date of the UFO event is obvious.  Not only is 
the date of an event a fundamental piece of identifying information, but it is necessary for any 
analyses of waves, cycles, or evolutionary aspects of the phenomena. The coding is relatively 
straightforward. These fields are arranged in the sequence year-month-day. 
 
 These data appear as given by the source, without elaboration or modification.  The TZ 
field serves as a flag field to contain any necessary comments. Missing data were simply 
omitted, with character codes provided to repr esent approximate information. Trailing zeros are 
included in these fields only when they are significant. For recurrent or prolonged events, 
date/time is recorded at the time of initial onset. 
 
FIELD NAME: YEAR WIDTH: 4 characters 
 
 This 4-character field contains the year of the event. When the precise year is not known, 
the decade of the event is coded with a period (.) in the last column. For example, an event 
which occurred in the 1960's for which the exact year is not known would be coded "196." If an 
event occurred early, in the middle, or late in a decade, but the exact year is uncertain, it can be 
coded with a "E", "M", or "L" in the last column.  For example, "196L" indicates an event that 
occurred late in the 1960s, possibly 1968 or 1969. 
 
FIELD NAME: MO WIDTH: 2 characters 
 
 This 2-character field represents the month of the event, using "01" through "12" to 
stand for January through December.  When the precise month is not known the first column 
will be blank; the second column will then contain another blank, or one of the following 
alphabetic codes -- 
 
 E Early (approximately January-April) 
 F Fall (approximately October-December). 
 L Late (approximately September-December) 
 M Middle or Summer (approximately May-August) 
 S Spring (approximately April-June) 
 W Winter (approximately January-March) 
 
FIELD NAME: DAY  WIDTH: 2 characters 
 
 This field represents the day of the event, using "01" through "31" in the obvious fashion. 
When the precise day cannot be coded the first column will be blank; the second column may 
then contain another blank, or one of the following alphabetic codes -- 
 
 E Early (approximately the first week) 
 M Middle 
 L Late (approximately the last week) 
   


--- PAGE 18 ---
FIELD NAME: TIME WIDTH: 5 characters 
 
 This five-character field represents the hour and minute in which the event occurred. 
The first two columns of the TIME field represent the hour of the event, using "00" through "23" 
in the obvious fashion; 2400 should be treated as 0000 of the following day.  If the precise hour 
could not be coded the TIME field will either be blank or contain one of the following codes -- 
 
 Day Daytime 
 Night Night 
 Morn Morning 
 After Afternoon 
 Even Evening 
 Dawn Sunrise or dawn 
 Noon Noon (sun at zenith) 
 Dusk Sunset or dusk 
 MidD Midday 
 MidN Midnight 
  Pdawn Predawn (the day listed is about to dawn) 
 
 The third and fourth columns of  TIME represent the minute of the onset of the event, 
using "00" through "59" in the obvious fashion.  "00" is not coded unless this is known to be 
reasonably accurate.  If the precise minute is not known, the fourth column in the field will be 
left blank, and the third column may then contain ---  
 
 - "early" or "before" 
 + "late" or "after" 
 Page 17  
  


--- PAGE 19 ---
FIELD NAME: TZ WIDTH: 2 character 
 
 This field is used to flag whether the date is approximate or if the time is coded as 
standard or daylight time, or GMT.  This field is also used to call attention to certain unusual 
conditions affecting the date/time coding.  Any of the following codes may appear in the TZ 
field, with the indicated meanings: 
 
 * The date/time field is coded in GMT (otherwise known as Greenwich mean time, 
Universal time or Z-time).  Note that the GMT date may not be the same as the 
local time date. 
 
 + The date/time field is coded in local daylight-savings time (one hour faster than 
standard time).  Again, the date may differ from the standard time date. 
 
 . The date/time field is definitely in local standard time.  Use of this code 
corresponds to explicit mention by the source that the time-scale is standard 
time. 
 
- The date is approximate, plus or minus one or two days.  If the date is known 
less precisely than this, an alphabetic code is used in the second column of the 
DAY field.2 
 
 ' The date is definitely a date-of-publication, and may be interpreted as "not later 
than". 
 
 = The date is as given by the direct source, but is believed (or known) to be in 
error. 
                     
2  A code of either "-" or "=" will normally exclude the entire record from consideration in chronological 
summaries or analysis 
 
 Page 18 
  


--- PAGE 20 ---
 
FIELD NAME: TZONE DATA TYPE: Number 
 
 This field is used to indicate the Time Zone of the event, for calculating Universal Time 
or Sidereal Time.  Zone times are the Standard Times kept on land and sea compared with 12 
hours (noon) Greenwich Mean Time.  The codes for the continental United States are 4 (Pacific 
Standard Time), 5 Mountain Standard Time, 6 (Central Standard Time), and 7 (Eastern 
Standard Time).  Table 3 shows the number codes for TZONE and the frequency of primary 
entries for each zone.  
 
Table 3: Time Zones of the World and Frequency of Primary UFO Cases 
 
TZONE States N
1 American Samoa, Kiribati 12 
2 Hawaiian Islands, French Polynesia 183 
3 Alaska 362 
4 West Coast US & Canada 6767 
5 Rocky Mountains 3903 
6 Midwest US, Mexico, Central America 10671 
7 East Coast US & Canada, Colombia, Peru, & Ecuador 20079 
8 Canadian Maritime, Puerto Rico, Venezuela, western 
Brazil, Bolivia, Paraguay, & Chile
1291 
8.5 Newfoundland 137 
9 Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina,  & Greenland 2938 
10 Atlantic Ocean 4 
11 Azores, Cape Verde 22 
12 Great Britain, Ireland, Iceland, Portugal, & west 6401 
13 Western & Central Europe, North Africa, Nigeria, 
Congo 
10157 
14 Eastern Europe, Turkey, Greece, Near East, Egypt, 
Zimbabwe, South Africa, Namibia 
1171 
15 Western Russia, Saudi Arabia, West Africa 435 
15.5 Iran 55 
16 Russia (Perm & Volgograd), Georgia, Armenia, 
Azerbaijan, U.A.E., Oman 
53 
17 Pakistan, Uzbekistan, western Kazakstan 21 
17.5 India, Sri Lanka 77 
18 Kazakhstan, Tajikistan 115 
18.5 Burma 7 
19 Russia (Siberia), Thailand, Vietnam, Indonesia 
(Sumatra & Java) 
114 
20 China, Taiwan, Philippines, Malaysia, Borneo, 
Western Australia 
469 
21 Japan, Korea, Yakutia, New Guinea  519 
21.5 South Australia, Northern Territory 508 
22 Papua New Guinea, Eastern Australia, Russian Far 
East 
2130 
23 Solomon Islands 1 
24 New Zealand, Fiji, Kamchatka Peninsula 937 
 Page 19  
  


--- PAGE 21 ---
FIELD NAME: WEA WIDTH: 8 characters 
 
Field for Weather Conditions
 
 The following 8-character abbreviations are used in the WEA field to indicate weather 
conditions that may be relevant to proper evaluation of a given sighting report.  This code is a 
recent addition to UFOCAT 2002 and typically is not systematically reported except in certain 
primary sources. 
 
Table 4: Weather Conditions and Frequency of Primary UFO Cases 
  
WEA Description N
Calm No wind, calm 1
Clear Visibility unrestricted 2309
Clouds Some clouds present 1
Cloudy Cloudy 746
Fog Foggy 123
Ice Ice on surface 48
Muddy Muddy (recent rain) 22
Overcast Overcast 285
Partial Partially sunny 3
Rain Raining 159
Snow Snow on surface 179
Storm Severe stormy weather 40
Thunder Thunderstorm 29
Undrcast Undercast (used for aircraft flying above cloud cover) 28
 Page 20 
  


--- PAGE 22 ---
FIELD NAME: TER WIDTH: 8 characters  
 
Field for Local Terrain
 
 The following abbreviations are used to indicate features of terrain and local landmarks 
in the vicinity of the UFO event that may be relevant to proper evaluation of a given sighting 
report. The pertinent data are not systematically av ailable from all sources, but are commonly 
provided in the more interesting cases. It should be emphasized that this field applies 
regardless of whether the terrain as featured figures directly in the scenario of the report. 
 
Table 5: Terrain and Frequency of Unexplained Primary UFO Cases 
 
TER N TER N TER N TER N 
Airfield 437  2 Junkyard 1 Saltflat 1
Airport 288 Dam      60 Kennel 1  1
AptBldg 17 Desert   99 Kitchen  14 School   117
Arsenal 3  2 Lake 751 Sewer    1
Balcony 1  1 Lane 10  
Bar  1 DriveIn 1 Lumber 1 Shop     3
Bedroom 124  4 Military 170 Shopyard 1
Bridge   22 Dump 20 Mill     1 Shore 532
Building 347 Electric 477 Mine     130 Smelter 3
  EmptyLot 2 Missile 177  
   1 Mountain 759 SpaceCnt 4
  Factory  64 Mudflat  1  1
  Fairgrou 2 Nuclear 221 Stable 5
  Farm 873 Observat 1 Stadium 10
  Fazenda  1 Ocean 1320 Street   29
  Field 193 Office   4 Studio   2
  FireTowr 108 Oilfield 9 Suburbs 178
   Orchard  6 Swamp 108
  Forest 624 Park     19 Taiga 1
  Garden 32 Parking  5 Town 193
 1 Glacier 1 Pasture 62  
Bushland 2 Golfcour 24 Patio    4 Trailer  4
BusStop 1 Grange   1 Plains   1 TrailrPk 7
Cabin    8 Grotto   1 Plantatn 1 Tundra 2
Camp 15 Grove    1 Plateau  1 Veldt    2
Camper   4 Hedgerow 1 Prairie  3 Village  45
Campsite 26 Highway 1289 Quarry   16  4
Canal    7 Hill 28 RaceTrac 3  1
Canyon   19 Home     36 Railroad 269 Warplane 150
Caravan  4 Hospital 56 Ranch 45 Warship 11
Cemetery 58 Hotel 6 Ravine   2 Waterfal 2
 1 House 180 Refinery 3  3
Church 19 Housing 3 Restaura 7 Zoo 1
City 1395 Hunting  6 River 282 Woods 18
CityHall 7 Ice 106 Road 467 Yard     881
Clearing 11 Indoors  10 Roadside 17  
Cliffs   1 Island   1 Rocky 18  
Clinic   1 Jungle   3 Rural 413  
 Page 21  
  


--- PAGE 23 ---
FIELD NAME: VFLG  WIDTH: 1 characters 
 
Flag Field for Special Location of the Witness(es) in a Vehicle
 
 The following one-column codes are used in VFLG field to call attention to the special 
location of the witnesses, specifically whether they were located in a spacecraft, flying aircraft, 
boat, ship, or moving automobile during at least some portion of the sighting.  Some of the 
conditions flagged are relatively rare, but others are quite common.  It is conceivable that more 
than one of these flags will apply to the same record.  In such a case, priority in coding has 
been given to the flag code closest to the bottom of the list. 
 
 ( The witness(es) were located in an orbiting spacecraft. 
 ' The witness(es) were located in a flying aircraft. 
 , The witness(es) were located in a boat, i.e., on water. 
 . The witness(es) were located in a moving automobile (or moving 
motorcycle) during at least some portion of the sighting. 
 
 # Witness(es) in a flying aircraft were in communication with surface-based 
witness(es) during at least some portion of the actual sighting. (If two or 
more groups of witness(es) made independent observations, then theore-
tically there should be distinct entries for each.) 
 
 
FIELD NAME: LOCATION WIDTH: 30 characters 
 
Geographic Place-Name
 
 Places are specified by sources in many ways and with many degrees of precision.  If 
geodetic coordinates are given, they have been coded directly into the fields LONGITUDE and 
LATITUDE.  Most typically, the source names a city or town, and the state or country containing 
that city or town.  In such cases, the city or town is entered in the LOCATION field, and the 
state or country is found in the STATE field. 
 
 UFOCAT 2002 has adopted a standard transliteration for names not normally spelled in 
the Roman alphabet ( World Atlas, New York: DK Publishing, 1997).  Where alternate Roman 
spellings or names exist, UFOCAT 2002 regards as correct the spelling used by the people who 
live there.  For example, the names of cities in Ukraine have been changed to their preferred 
Ukrainian spelling from Russian. 
 
 Place-names begin in the first column, with any necessary modifiers placed after.  Thus, 
you will find locations which are described as “10 miles southwest of Louisville” in UFOCAT 
2002 as "LOUISVILLE SW 1OM", not as "10M SW LOUISVILLE".  "LOUISVILLE SW10M" and 
"LOUISVILLE, OH RIVER " are other forms that are acceptable and will usually sort into the 
proper place without confusion. 
 
 Sometimes a place is described as between two namable places.  Both will be named, 
the closer one first, with the two separated by a "=".  The first name will be spelled out 
completely while  the second one may be abbreviated, depending upon space limitations. 
 
 Page 22 
  


--- PAGE 24 ---
 Some foreign place-names cannot be fully spelled in 30 characters and have been 
abbreviated. With few exceptions, this will take t he form of truncation, so that sorting will still 
occur as if there had been room for the whole name.  The primary exception is that " SAINT" is 
always abbreviated to " ST", and "SAINTE" to " STE" (note absence of any period).  Imbedded 
periods are used, however, to indicate omission of trivial words which frequently occur in foreign 
place names, e.g., "Paray-le-Monial" is coded as " PARAY.MONIAL"; such shortening has been 
used even when the unshortened name would have been less than 30 characters. 
 
 The result of these coding rules is that county codes and coordinates become assigned 
simply on the basis of the place-name given, ignoring the meaning of any modifiers.  Better 
coordinates may be computed during an analysis.  If the county or state is found to be wrong, 
the place-name has been flagged as an error with the correct county or state code inserted. 
 
FIELD NAME: LFLG 
WIDTH: 1 character 
 
Flag Field for Location of the Phenomenon
 
 The following one-column codes are used in the LFLG field to call attention to special 
factors affecting the proper interpretation of location.  
 
 - The location named is only approximate.  E.g., the source said near Los 
Angeles, or referred to the Baltimore area, or the like. 
 
 + The coordinate information in the LONGITUDE and LATITUDE fields is the spe-
cific witness location for this sighting.  Otherwise it may be assumed that any co-
ordinates merely refer to the named place, regardless of where the witness was 
located. 
 
 * The coordinate information in the LONGITUDE and LATITUDE fields is the spe-
cific location of the phenomenon, as determined from traces or other strong 
evidence. 
 
 = The place-name in the LOCATION field is that given by the direct source, but is 
believed (or known) to be in error.  Place-names will not be considered to be in 
error for purposes of this coding unless they would locate the event in the wrong 
county (see the COUNTY field).  Incorrect place-names, which appear to be 
merely misspellings, have been routinely corrected. 
 
 
 Page 23  
  


--- PAGE 25 ---
FIELD NAME: REGION WIDTH: 2 characters 
 
 Whereas the location information in the LOCATION field permits easy recognition of 
events in the context of source documentation, the location information in the REGION, STATE, 
and COUNTY fields assigns events to statistically useful geographic areas. 
 
 The largest geographic division is the world REGION field.  This field contains a one or 
two letter abbreviation for the continent, ocean, or major region of the world in which the UFO 
event occurred.  The WORLD table contains these region codes and names for providing 
headings for geographically indexed lists.  The following are the existing abbreviations and 
counts -- 
Table 6: World Regions and Frequency of Unexplained UFO Cases 
 
REGION Description N 
  
A Atlantic Ocean, including Iceland 361 
AA Antarctica 44 
AF Africa 972 
AS Asia 1453 
AU Australia and Oceania, including Papua New Guinea 4075 
CA Central America, including Puerto Rico 752 
CN Canada 4566 
EU Europe, including Russia west of the Ural Mountains 20127 
I Indian Ocean 29 
M Mediterranean Sea 36 
ME Middle East 217 
NA North America (unspecified US or CN) 14 
P Pacific Ocean, including Hawaii 428 
SA South America 4452 
US United States, excluding Hawaii and Puerto Rico 40648 
W World 25 
XX Outer Space 106 
RE Roman Empire (historical) 6 
 
 
FIELD NAME: STATE WIDTH: 3 characters 
 
State (or Country) 
 
 The STATE field represents a major political unit.  We use these for statistics because 
of the wide variety of data that have already been tabulated and published according to political 
divisions and subdivisions.  The fact that political units differ in area, population, etc., presents 
no new problem in analysis.  Any attempt to create artificial units of equal area, for example, 
would not create units of equal population, but would destroy the possibility of using existing 
tabulations of demographic data. In order to make demographic and other data available for 
computer analysis, the COUNTY table includes a "master record" for each geopolitical unit 
definable by coding in the STATE and COUNTY fields.  They are used, among other things, to 
provide heading lines for geographically sorted lists. 
 
 Page 24 
  


--- PAGE 26 ---
 The STATE field code is normally a three-letter code indicating the country wherein an 
event has occurred or a two-letter code indicating the state or province of the USA, Canada, or 
Australia. The provinces of Canada and the states of Australia and the USA have been given 
distinct codes in order to allow even further subdivision into counties; these more specific codes 
should be used whenever possible.  One-letter and two-letter codes have been assigned to the 
continents, oceans, and seas, which may be used when necessary.  A current list of all codes is 
contained in the WORLD.DBF database and is provided in Appendix B.  The STATE codes for 
the 50 States in the United States, plus the District of Columbia, correspond exactly to the two-
letter US Postal Service ZIP code abbreviations. If the code you need is missing, please do not 
invent a new one; consult the UFOCAT 2002 project director. 
 
 
FIELD NAME: COUNTY WIDTH: 12 characters 
 
County (Province)
 
 The COUNTY field represents a minor political subdivision where an event has been 
observed.  Experience has shown that the approximately 3150 counties of the USA provide a 
usable geographic classification.  Even when two versions of the same event refer to it by 
different place-names, they still almost always lead to the same region-state-county coding and 
thereby associate the two reports.  The principle of tallying no more than one similar record per 
county per date effectively eliminates such duplications from summary statistics.  A n explicit list 
of the county codes for the USA can be found in the COUNTIES  table, which is too large to 
publish in this guide. 
 
 
FIELD NAME: WITNESSES WIDTH: 8 Characters 
 
 The first three columns of the WITNESSES field contain the number of witnesses.  This 
will normally be a straightforward numerical code, right justified with leading blanks.  "-" may prefix 
the number with the meaning "about". "+" may prefix the number with the meaning "at least." (A 
reference in the text to a plural number of witnesses would usually have been coded as "+2".)  If 
the number of witnesses was large, "C" may have been suffixed to mean "hundred," or "K" may 
have been suffixed to mean "thousand."  If the number of witnesses is only vaguely specified, a 
single letter may appear in the third column, as follows -- 
 
 F few 
 G group 
 M many or multiple 
 N numerous 
 S several 
 
FIELD NAME: AGE WIDTH: 2 Characters 
 
 AGE contains the age of the "principal witness" in years.  The principal witness’s last name 
will appear in the NAMES field listed first (see below).  He or she may have been the sole witness, 
or the member of a group whose experience was t he most completely recorded.  Typically, that 
person may also have been the first one to observe the UFO, or may have been the 
spokesperson for a group all sharing the same experience. Creation of this field occurred in 1976, 
so the coding for entries with record numbers below 81,000 is spotty; this is also an information 
item not systematically available except in primary sources. 
 Page 25  
  


--- PAGE 27 ---
 If no "principle witness" could be recognized, or if this person's age is not given, this field 
may include a code to indicate the composition of the witness group.  In such cases, the first 
character will be a digit indicating the total number of families represented in the group; the 
second character will be a letter according to the following key: 
 
 A Adult (marital status unknown or mixed) 
 C Children 
 T Teenager 
 S Adults, single 
 M Adults, married 
 X Mixed Y and W 
 Y Young; all under 20 (mixed C and T) 
 W All over 20 (Mixed S and M) 
 
FIELD NAME: SEX WIDTH: 1 Character 
 
 The SEX field contains an alphabetic code to indicate sex.  The letters "M" and "F" are 
used only when all the witnesses are of the same sex.  "C" will refer to a couple (husband and 
wife).  Children of these parents may also be present.  Any other defined situation has been coded 
"X", meaning mixed.  A blank will indicate the data are simply missing or uncoded. 
 
FIELD NAME: MIS WIDTH: 1 Character 
 
 The MIS field is a flag field for witness data.  The codes that currently appear are -- 
 
  # indicates that the witness(es) were military personnel 
  + indicates that the witness(es) were police. 
  = indicates that the witness name copied from the source is incorrect or 
misspelled. 
 
 
FIELD NAME: NAMES WIDTH: 30 Characters 
 
Witness Names
 
 There can be little doubt that it has been helpful to include witness names.  This was not 
done in the first version of UFOCAT in an attempt to preserve the privacy of the witnesses, and in 
the erroneous belief that witness names were not necessary for identifying the sighting (in the 
sense of matching a record with other reports of the same event).  In truth, data are frequently 
incomplete and/or erroneous, and witness names provide the major source of confirmation when 
matching entries that otherwise agree only imperfectly. 
 
 In addition, the mere fact that a witness name is known at all may be an important piece of 
data in some analyses.  Witnesses who remain anonymous or who request confidentiality are 
probably different from witnesses who permit or even seek publicity. 
 
 Page 26 
  


--- PAGE 28 ---
 The major problem with witness names is t hat many investigators have (quite properly) 
agreed to keep some or all witness identification data confidential or to assign pseudonyms.  In 
order to be able to use the witness names for its file management purposes, UFOCAT 2002 has 
been modified to honor these commitments of confidentiality. This means that unpublished names 
appearing in the file have been reduced to show only the initial letter in the CD version that you 
receive. 
 
 The guidelines for coding witness names are similar to those discussed in connection with 
place names.  To facilitate sorting, the last name of the major witness is spelled in full.  Only last 
names are coded.  The last names or initials of  other known witnesses will be separated from 
each other and the main witness by a "=".  Names or acronyms of organizations may also be 
given, enclosed in parentheses, e.g., "(USAF)". If the true witness name is held in confidence by 
an investigator, then often the investigator's name may be substituted and is enclosed in reverse 
parentheses, e.g., ")CUFOS(". 
 
FIELD NAME: AST DATA TYPE: Number 
 
Absolute Sidereal Time 
 
 Another measure of time is sidereal time, or "star time".  Solar time differs from sidereal 
time because the Earth revolves around the Sun in a great elliptical orbit, and it takes the Earth an 
additional 4 minutes to return to the same position relative to the Sun than it does to return to the 
same position relative to a distant star.  On the vernal equinox (March 22nd) the two systems are 
in sync, but every day after that the sidereal cl ock runs 4 minutes faster, until by the autumnal 
equinox the two systems are 12 hours apart.  The sidereal clock continues to run 4 minutes 
ahead each day and by the time a year has passed the sidereal clock is 24 hours ahead of the 
solar clock.  However, the apparent gap begins to narrow until by the vernal equinox the two time 
systems are once again in sync.  Absolute Si dereal Time (AST) is a measure of the mean 
sidereal time, rather than the local sidereal time.  For the UFOCAT 2002 database, 0 hour or 
midnight on the AST clock occurs when the celestial plane that intersects Epsilon Eridanus (3h 
30m Right Ascension) is aligned with the zenith at Puy de Dome, France, w hich is located at 
2.933 East longitude, 45.766 degrees N latitude. 
 
 In practice AST is calculated less precisely by using the Time Zone field (TZONE) rather 
than geographical coordinates to determine the difference in hours between the local sidereal 
time and the sidereal time of the UFO event in Puy de Dome, France.  AST is stored as a 4-digit 
integer and rounded to the nearest hour.  
 
 
FIELD NAME: HYNEK WIDTH: 3 characters 
 
 This field provides for a two or three character code for the UFO report according to Dr. J. 
Allen Hynek's prototypes (see The UFO Experience: A Scientific Inquiry, Henry Regnery, 1972). 
These codes are shown in table 7. Some of these have been expanded over the years.  For 
example, CE4 was added to describe abduction reports; NO was added to differentiate structured 
nocturnal objects with definite physical features from nocturnal lights; and DO was added to 
describe daylight objects that were not disc-shaped. 
 Page 27  
  


--- PAGE 29 ---
 
Table 7: HYNEK UFO Report Categories Used in UFOCAT 2002 
 
I. Sightings of distant UFOs 
 
  Code  Description
 
  NL  Nocturnal Lights 
  ND  Nocturnal Discs 
  NO  Nocturnal Objects 
 
  DD  Daylight Discs 
  DL  Daylight Light 
  DO  Daylight Objects 
 
  RV  Radar-Visual UFO Reports 
  RR  Radar UFO Reports 
 
II. Close encounter UFO events 
 
  Code  Description 
 
  CE1 Close Encounters of the First Kind 
  CE2 Close Encounters of the Second Kind 
  CE3 Close Encounters of the Third Kind (Entity Reports) 
  CE4 Close Encounters of the Fourth Kind  (Abduction Reports) 
 
 
III. Miscellaneous events possibly related to the UFO phenomenon 
 
 Code Description 
 
 AM Animal mutilation reports (other than cattle) 
 BH "Black" or mystery helicopter sightings 
 CM Cattle mutilation reports 
 CR Accounts of Crashed Discs and their retrieval 
 MIB MIB reports, e.g. military imposters, mystery investigators, 
or other forms of interference with report investigation 
 TC Trace Reports without the presence of a UFO (e.g. crop 
circles) 
 
 Page 28 
  


--- PAGE 30 ---
FIELD NAME: VALLEE WIDTH: 3 characters  
 
 This field provides for a three character code for the UFO report according to Dr. Jacques 
Vallee's classification system (see Confrontations: A Scientist's Search for Alien Contact, 
Ballantine, 1990). These codes are shown and described in table 8 below. Reports of anomalous 
events fall into four broad groups: anomalies ( no UFO present), close encounters, maneuvers, 
and flybys.  Vallee's categories of close encounters correspond to Hynek's categories, with the 
exception that contactee cases are classified as CE4 cases in VALLEE whereas in the HYNEK 
classification contactee cases remain classified as CE3 cases, with CE4 reserved exclusively for 
reports of abduction. 
 
Table 8: VALLEE UFO Report Categories Used in UFOCAT 2002 
 
Anomalies 
(no UFO) 
 
Flybys 
 
AN1 
An anomaly with no lasting physical 
effects such as amorphous lights or 
unexplained explosions. 
FB1 
A simple sighting of a UFO "flying by" 
in the sky, or remaining stationary in 
one place. 
AN2 
Anomalies with lasting physical effects, 
such as some poltergeist phenomena, 
apports (materialized objects), and 
areas of flattened grass. 
FB2 A flyby accompanied by physical 
evidence. 
AN3 
An anomaly with associated entities, 
such as reports of ghosts, bigfoot, 
dwarfs. 
FB3 A flyby of an object accompanied by 
observation of occupants on board. 
AN4 
Anomalous reports in which witnesses 
experienced personal interaction with 
entities in the rea lity of the entities 
themselves, including out-of-body 
experiences. 
FB4 A flyby where the witness experienced 
a transformation of his or her reality. 
AN5 
Cases of anomalous injuries or deaths, 
such as spontaneous combustion, 
unexplained wounds, and permanent 
healing. 
FB5 A flyby in which the witnesses suffered 
permanent injuries. 
Close 
Encounters 
 
Maneuvers 
 
CE1 Close encounters with no physical 
effects. MA1 A sighting of a UFO that involves an 
object with a discontinuous trajectory. 
CE2 
Close encounters with physical effects, 
such as electromagnetic interference or 
physical traces left behind. 
MA2 
Cases of UFOs with discontinuous 
trajectories that give rise to physical 
effects. 
CE3 Close encounters with associated 
entities, seen in the vicinity of a UFO. MA3 
A sighting of a maneuvering object or 
objects accompanied by observation of 
occupants on board. 
CE4 
Close encounters in which witnesses 
experienced personal interaction with 
entities in the realit y of the entities 
themselves. 
MA4 
Instances of maneuvers accompanied 
by a sense of transformation of reality 
for the percipient. 
CE5 Cases of close encounters resulting in 
permanent injuries or deaths. MA5 
A report involving a maneuvering UFO 
in which the witnesses suffered 
permanent injuries. 
 Page 29  
  


--- PAGE 31 ---
FIELD NAME: SVP WIDTH: 3 characters 
 
The SVP Credibility Rating 
 
 A classification system developed by Dr. Jacques Vallee as a way of assigning credibility to a 
report.  The system appears to have the advantage that it is simple enough to be applied quickly with 
enough mnemonic value that it does not require constant reference to a reference manual.  It is a 
three digit code based on 3 components:  (1) the reliability of the source, (2) a site visit status, and 
(3) the plausibility of possible explanations. 
 
First Digit: Source Reliability (S) 
 
0 Unknown source or unreliable source 
1 Report attributed to a known source of uncalibrated reliability 
2 Reliable source, secondhand 
3 Reliable source, firsthand 
4 Firsthand personal interview with the witness of proven reliability, by a source of 
proven reliability 
 
Second Digit: Site Visit (V) 
 
0 No site visit, or answer unknown 
1 Site visit by a casual person not familiar with such phenomena 
2 Site visit by persons familiar with such phenomena 
3 Site visit by a reliable investigator with some experience 
4 Site visit by a skilled analyst 
 
Third Digit: Possible Explanations (P) 
 
0 Data consistent with one or more natural causes 
1 Natural explanation requires only slight modification of the data 
2 Natural explanation requires gross alteration of one parameter 
3 Natural explanation requires gross alteration of several parameters 
4 No natural explanation possible, given the evidence 
 Page 30 
  


--- PAGE 32 ---
 
FIELD NAME: TYPE WIDTH: 12 characters 
 
Type of Report (from Saunders)
 
 Type of report appears in the first column of the TYPE field, and is a one-digit code ranging from 0 
through 9.  This also comprises an approximate scale of "strangeness."  Reports that seem to call for more 
than one of these codes have been assigned the highest number that fits.  Provision is made for further sub-
classification of the major types defined in the first column.  Definitions for these types follow -- 
 
 0 The direct source considers that this was not properly regarded as a UFO report in the first 
place, though it may have definite ufological interest.  UFO reports that later became 
explained should receive other codes based on their apparent phenomenology. 
 
 1 The UFO was essentially stationary throughout  the period of its reported observation.  
Motion up to and including 15 degrees per hour (which is the apparent motion of heavenly 
bodies) is considered essentially stationary. 
 
 2 The UFO moved in a continuous trajectory at a speed greater than 15 degrees per hour. 
 
 3 The UFO moved in a non-continuous trajectory, with a single discontinuity -- such as 
turning a sharp corner or pausing to hover. 
 
 4 The UFO moved in a non-continuous trajecto ry, with more than one discontinuity.  This 
includes all types of complex trajectories. 
 
 5 The UFO "entered the frame of reference" of the witness.  This may be indicated in many 
different ways, which are suggested by the sub-classifications.  Vallee's "Type I," Keel's 
"Low Level," and Hynek's "Encounter" cases are all at least Type 5. So are all photo cases, 
radar cases, EM cases, or cases "investigated" by the witness. 
 
 6 The UFO "landed" within the frame of reference of the witness.  A "landing" is deemed to 
have occurred if the minimum separation of the object from the ground is less than or equal 
to the major dimension of the object.  Actual  physical traces may or not be reported. (A 
remote "landing" is treated as a subclass of Type 3.) 
 
 7 One or more "occupants" were reported by the witness outside of the object. (An occupant-
only report is also treated as a Type 7; the number of objects coded in the TEXT field will 
simply be zero.) An inside occupant report is Type 6, sub-type 0. 
 
 8 The witness reports that there was in telligent communication associated with his 
experience, at a level of abstraction that would normally require the use of language.  Thus, 
telepathic communication can qualify, but mere gestures and/or repetition of light signals do 
not automatically qualify.  Unintelligible "language" is Type 6 or 7, sub-type L. 
 
 9 The UFO apparently caused lasting physical or functional effects in the witness, or on other 
animal life, which remain after the UFO is gone.  These effects may be either "good" or 
"bad".  (The "contactee syndrome" is lasting enough, but is treated as Type 8 on grounds 
that it is at least superficially non-physical.)  Cases of abduction and missing time fall into 
this category, as do cattle mutilation reports. 
 
 Page 31  
  


--- PAGE 33 ---
Sub-Type(s) of Reports
 
 In prior versions of UFOCAT 2002 it proved particularly difficult to deal with the more 
interesting cases, which often presented combinations of apparently codeable sub-types.  In view 
of this situation, the ground rules for coding sub-type were changed, primarily to enlarge the 
capacity and potential usefulness of this field of data. 
 
 In UFOCAT 2002 the whole field from the second column through the last column is to be 
interpreted as a unit.  The first character--Type of Report--will always be a digit; the definitions of 
these codes have been tightened, with the effect of down-rating a few reports.  The next group of 
characters will consist of letters, interpretable as one or more sub-type codes; as noted in the key, 
some letters may have more than one meaning depending on the context of prior type and sub-
type codes in the character sequence.  (For example, S can refer to still photographs: the position 
of S in context can indicate whether this is a photo of an object, or of trace marks, or of a radar 
screen, etc.) 
 
 It will be noted that a few sub-type codes are defined as double letters; these codes 
necessarily include the meaning of the same letter occurring only once.  In effect, the first letter in 
the double is the single-letter code, and the repeat letter is a special example of a code whose 
meaning depends on the context provided by the first. 
 
Table 9: KEY TO SUB-TYPE CODES 
 
 0 Miscellaneous non-UFO reports 
 0A Aircraft accidents 
 0B Balloon launches (high-altitude, Skyhook, etc.) 
 0C Conjunctions (astronomical) 
 0D Death (e.g., of an investigator) 
 0E Electromagnetic phenomena 
 0H Humanoid report (without UFO, normal stature with human features) 
 0L Little man report (without UFO, e.g. dwarf, height under 5' tall) 
 0M Monster report (without UFO, e.g. Sasquatch, creature over 6'6" tall) 
 0N Artificial cloud 
 0P Power failures 
 0Q Earthquakes 
 0R Satellite re-entries 
 0T Various traces (without UFO) (# of objects now becomes number of trace marks) 
 0V Rocket launches 
 0W Weather phenomena 
 0X Explosions and skyquakes 
 Page 32 
  


--- PAGE 34 ---
KEY TO SUB-TYPE CODES (Continued) 
 
 1 Reports of stationary UFOs 
 1A Astronomical anomalies (moon bridges, Martian explosions, etc) 
 1B Balloon-like behavior (high altitudes, "Skyhook", etc.) 
 1C Comets (i.e., in the position of a comet) 
 1E Electromagnetic anomalies (LDES, unknown signals, etc.) 
 1J Jupiter (i.e., in the position of Jupiter) 
 1L Moon (i.e., in the position of the moon) 
 1M Mars (i.e., in the position of mars) 
 1P Sun 
 1S Star (specifically nameable) 
 1V Venus (i.e., in the position of Venus) 
 1X Explosion (in place) 
 
 2 Continuously moving UFOs 
 2A Aircraft-like behavior 
 2B Balloon-like behavior (hot-air or weather) 
 2C Cloud-cigar shaped object(s) 
 2D Disc-shaped object(s) 
 2E Echo satellite (=O) 
 2F Fireball 
 2G Green fireball 
 2I Instrumented observation 
 2L "Ghost Lights" 
 2M Meteor-like behavior 
 2P Procession of objects (possibly seen singly) 
 2S Sputnik satellite (=O) 
 2X  Bolide 
 2Z Crescent-shaped object 
 
 3 UFOs with non-continuous trajectories 
 3C Cloud-cigar shaped object(s) 
 3D Disc-shaped object(s) 
 3H Hovered 
 3L Landed (remotely) 
 3TG "Angel hair" 
 3W Independent witnesses 
 3X  Exploded 
 3Z Crescent-shaped object 
 
 Page 33  
  


--- PAGE 35 ---
 KEY TO SUB-TYPE CODES (Continued) 
 
 4 Trajectories with multiple discontinuities 
 4^ Vertical ascent 
 4C Cloud-cigar with satellite object(s) 
 4D Disc-shaped object(s) 
 4H Multiple hovering 
 4L Falling leaf maneuver 
 4W Independent witnesses 
 4Y "Angel hair" residue associated with UFO presence 
 4ZZ Zigzag maneuver 
 
 5 Encounter reports without landing 
 5^ Vertical ascent 
 5A Acrobatics 
 5B Buzzing 
 5C Chasing-pacing 
 5D Disc shape 
 5E EM effect 
 5G Gravity effect or other strange field--"Mass displacement" 
 5H Sketch (this must not accompany an S) 
 5I Instrumented observation 
 5II Internal comparison 
 5K Interference with investigation 
 5M Animals present (This M must precede any S) 
 5N Noise or sound 
 5O Inside occupant (This O must be in second column) 
 5_O Ring or circle (This O must not be in second column) 
 5P Physiological effects (transient) 
 5Q Quantitative analysis 
 5R Radar observation without visual confirmation 
 5RR Multiple radar  
 5S Still picture 
 5SD Photo of disc 
 5SL Luminous/transparent (photo) 
 5SM Movies (This M must follow the S) 
 5SS Structured photo 
 5SZ Point in motion 
 5T Physical trace(s) correlated with object(s) 
 5TF Altered field (trace) 
 5TJ Remnant (trace) 
 5TT Ground marks (trace) 
 5TU Chemical change (trace) 
 5TX Radioactivity (This X must follow the T) 
 5V Radar/visual confirmation 
 5W Independent witnesses 
 5Y Psychic effects/testimony obtained under hypnosis 
 5ZZ Zigzag maneuver 
 Page 34 
  


--- PAGE 36 ---
 
 KEY TO SUB-TYPE CODES (Continued) 
 
 6 Landing reports without outside occupants 
 6A through 6Z    Same as for Type 5 
 
 7 outside occupant reports without contact 
 7A through 7Z  Same as for Type 5 except: 
 7L Unintelligible language 
 7M Monster (i.e., non-humanoid or giant, with UFO also seen) 
 
 8 Contact reports 
 8A through 8Z  Same as for Type 7 except: 
 8K "MIB" or "Men in Black" incident, harassment or intimidation 
 
 9 Interference; the UFO changes something living 
 9A Abduction or disappearance 
 9B Teleportation or abduction and return 
 9C Contact effects 
 9D Death 
 9F Other functional effects 
 9H Healing effects of any kind 
 9L Lapse of time experienced by witness(es) 
 9M Animal mutilations 
 9O occupants involved 
 9R Remote (ray) effects 
 9T Trace-handling effects 
 9X  Explosion(s) 
 9Y Hypnotic effects 
 9Z Miscellaneous accidents 
 
 Page 35  
  


--- PAGE 37 ---
FIELD NAME: EXPL WIDTH: 1 character 
 
Explainability of Report
 
 Explainability (EXPL) is a one-character field, which appears following the TYPE field.  It 
may be a punctuation mark or a special character.  This coding is used to indicate the con-
ventional or unconventional direction of the direct source's explanation for the report, and the 
degree of certainty that the source attaches to the explanation.  Thus: 
 
 = The direct source is sure that this report has a conventional explanation, which is 
identified in the EXPLAN field. (This code is used with a majority of the Project 
Blue Book entries, and it could likely be assigned to almost all entries of Type 1.) 
 
 - The direct source says that this report "probably" or "possibly" has a conventional 
explanation, which is identified in the EXPLAN field. 
 
  (blank) The direct source offers no particular explanation for this report. (This code is used 
for Blue Book reports that are "explained" as "insufficient information.") 
 
 + The direct source says or implies that this report probably does require an 
unconventional explanation.  This code indicates a "better than average" UFO 
report, even for this source.  This code is used for all Project Bluebook cases listed 
as "unidentified" or "unknown." 
 
 * The direct source is virtually certain that this report requires an unconventional 
explanation.  This code should be reserved for cases that can "stand on their own." 
 This code is also assigned to certain cases where, in the judgment of the coder, 
the official explanation is impossible; the code would otherwise be "-".  This coding 
may be found used with Blue Book cases and cases reviewed by noted debunkers 
such as Dr. Donald Menzel, Philip Klass, and some of the investigators associated 
with the Colorado UFO Study of 1966-69 (the Condon Project). 
 
 
FIELD NAME: EXPLAN WIDTH: 10 characters 
 
Type of Explanation
 
 This is a code or abbreviation for the explanation of a UFO report, according to the key on 
the following page.  The explanation coded is that of the direct source and may or may not be 
accurate.  The examples given in parentheses are not exhaustive and merely help to indicate the 
range of possibilities covered by each code.  In some cases a combination of causes (such as a 
star and a false radar return) may have been responsible for the report.  In those cases the more 
important cause has been recorded, as judged by the coder. 
 Page 36 
  


--- PAGE 38 ---
Table 10: Type of Explanation 
 
EXPLAN Count Description 
Aircraft 2803 Airplane, helicopter, blimp, aircraft lights, or exhaust trail 
Animals 41 Animals or traces left by terrestrial species 
AnomProp 29 Anomalous Propagation (radar) 
Aurora 2 Aurora borealis/australis borealis 
Balloon 1793 Balloon 
Birds 49 Birds or traces left by birds 
Blimp 8 Blimp or dirigible 
Bolide 1 Slow moving meteor 
Cloud 84 Cloud(s) 
Coincidenc 78 Coincidence (film flaw, combination of other explanations) 
Comet 1 Comet 
Debris 188 Debris  
EM 150 Electromagnetic (ball lightning, aurora borealis) 
FalseTarge 3 False Target (radar) 
Fireball 1 Fireball, fiery meteor 
Flare 130 Flare (flash bomb, gun firing, fire)  
Hallucinat 6 Hallucination 
Helicopter 1 Helicopter 
Hoax 499 Hoax (witness is the perpetrator) 
Inversion 3 Temperature inversion 
Junk 7 Manufactured by-product or debris 
Jupiter 149 Jupiter 
Lensflare 6 Lens flare 
Light 2 Street light or other terrestrial light 
Lights 1 Street lights, car headlights, or other terrestrial lights 
Malfunct 77 Equipment malfunction 
Mars 126 Mars 
Meteor 2768 Meteor (or meteorite for trace cases) 
Mirage 167 Mirage 
Missile 1 Missile track 
Moon 67 Moon 
Natural 179 Other natural phenomena (natural minerals, rocks, trees or plants) 
Op-error 2 Operator error (radar) 
Planet 843 Planet (unspecified) 
Prank 81 Prank (witness is the victim of a hoax) 
Psych 130 Psychological explanation (psychosis, delusion, etc.) 
Quake 7 Earthquake 
RadarChaff 3 Radar chaff 
Re-entry 202 Re-entry of satellite 
Reflection 389 Reflection (of light phenomena, sun dogs) 
Rocket 176 Rocket launch, exhaust trail 
Rumor 1 Rumor of event that never occurred 
Satelite 879 Orbiting satellite of terrestrial origin 
Saturn 1 Saturn 
SpiderGoss 6 Spider Goss 
Star 796 Star 
Trawlers 1 Ships at sea, fishing boats, lights of shrimp boats, etc. 
Unreliable 1 Unreliable witness (see hoax) 
Venus 94 Venus 
Weather 76 Weather phenomena 
Wind 1 Wind 
 
 Page 37  
  


--- PAGE 39 ---
 
FIELD NAME: NUMOBJ WIDTH: 3 characters 
 
Number of objects 
 
 The NUMOBJ field contains the number of reported objects.  This will normally be a 
straightforward numerical code, right justified in the third column with leading blanks.  "-" may be 
prefixed with the meaning "about".  "+" may be prefixed with the meaning "at least."  Normally, the 
number of objects will be coded as the largest number seen at the same time during any phase of 
the sighting.  However, for a procession of UFOs (report type “2P” or “3P”), the maximum possible 
number of objects has been coded, on the assumption that each object seen was different.  For 
trace cases without a UFO seen (report type “0T”) the number of "objects" is the number of trace 
marks reported.  If no object is involved in the report, the third column will be explicitly coded as 
"0" (zero). 
 
 If the number of objects is not precisely given by the source, single letter codes may 
appear in the third column, as shown below.  Note that all of these codes are parallel in meaning 
with the codes for number of witnesses. 
 
 F few 
 G group 
 M many 
 N numerous 
 S several 
 
FIELD NAME: DUR WIDTH: 3 characters 
 
Duration of observation 
 
 The DUR field contains the estimated duration of observation.  This will normally be given 
in minutes, right justified with leading blanks: "+" may prefix the quantity with the meaning "at 
least."  All durations are regarded as approximate, so that the "-" prefix is not used.  If time is 
reported in seconds, this will be converted to tenths of minutes (rounding up) and punched with a 
preceding decimal point. (Thus, ".0" includes reports up to 2 seconds; ".1" includes reports from 3 
through 8 seconds; etc.).  If time is reported in hours or days, "H" or "D" will appear in the third 
character as a suffix.  However, please note that times reported in hours and minutes, or as hours 
and fractions of an hour, have usually been converted to the total number of minutes. 
 
 A few letter codes also are used, as follows -- 
 
  B brief 
 VB very brief 
 .F a few seconds 
 .S several seconds 
 SH several hours 
 Page 38 
  


--- PAGE 40 ---
FIELD NAME: SIZE DATA TYPE: Number  
 
Size of Object 
 
 Where an estimate of the size of the UFO is reported, the SIZE field will contain a 
quantity.  This will be based on the largest possible value.  In other words, size will be assessed in 
terms of the largest dimension of the object as observed at its point of closest approach to the 
witness(es).  The basic purpose of the code is to indicate the importance of the sighting, and to 
indicate the degree of further detail that should be expected in the report.  For report type “0T”, 
the size of the "object" is the size of the trace mark reported. 
 
 If both absolute and angular size data were reported, preference has been given to 
coding the absolute size. Commonly neither is reported and this field is blank. 
 
 When absolute size is reported, the code will be a whole number.  This number will be 
the base-2 logarithm of the largest dimension of the object expressed in feet.  For example, a disc 
reported as 25 feet in diameter by 6 feet thick is coded "5".  A sphere 3 inches in diameter is 
coded "-2".  A cigar-shaped object 900 feet long is coded "10".  Codes of absolute size do not 
contain any non-numeric characters other than "-".  Use the following table to convert base-2 
logarithms to size in feet: 
 
Table 11: Size of UFO (Log Base-2) 
  
SIZE N Size in Feet Meters Miles 
-2 25 .3 ft 8 cm  
-1 23 .5 ft 15 cm  
0 134 1 ft 0.3 m  
1 124 2 ft 0.6 m  
2 211 4 ft  (3 - 5 ft) 1.2 m  
3 347 8 ft  (6 - 11 ft)  2.4 m  
4 654 16 ft (12 - 22 ft) 5 m  
5 726 32 ft (23 - 45 ft)  10 m  
6 462 64 ft (46 - 90 ft) 20 m  
7 307 128 ft (91 - 180 ft) 39 m  
8 200 256 ft (181 - 361 ft)  78 m  
9 93 512 (362 - 724 ft) 156 m  
10 34 1028 ft (725 - 1448 ft)  314 m 1/4 
11 8 2048 ft (1449 - 2896 ft)  627 m 1/2 
12 4 4096 ft (2897 - 5793 ft)  1248 m 1 
13 4 8192 (5794 - 11,585 ft) 2497 m  2 
14 0 16384 (11,586 - 23,170 ft) 4994 m 4 
 Page 39  
  


--- PAGE 41 ---
FIELD NAME: ANGSZ WIDTH: 3 characters 
 
Apparent (or angular) Size of Object 
 
 When angular size is reported, the code appearing in the ANGSZ field will usually be a 
number preceded by a decimal point, according to the following key -- 
 
  . strictly a point source 
 .0 a non-point source smaller than the moon (or sun) 
 .1 angular size about equal to the sun or moon 
 .2 angular size about twice that of sun or moon 
 .3 angular size about three times that of sun or moon, etc. 
 
 Angular size is also imprecisely reported by witnesses, in terms of some equivalent object, 
presumably (but not always explicitly) held at arm's length.  Also, qualitative descriptions such as 
"immense" or "huge" give some very rough method of describing size.  Some of these qualitative 
descriptions of size are coded by a letter preceded by a left parentheses "(" in the second column, 
based on codes developed by Dr. Claude Poher (C. Poher, Etudes Statistiques Portant Sur 1000 
Temoignages D'Observation D'U.F.O.).  A list of these codes follows – 
 
 (A "immense", "huge", "incredibly large" without an exact estimate 
 (B the size of a quarter ("une piece de cinq francs") held at arm’s 
length 
 (C the size of an orange ("une orange") held at arm’s length 
 (D the size of a melon ("un melon" - "un assiette") 
 (E "40 cm" ("comme une citrouille) 
 (F "1 metre" 
 (G "2 metres" 
 (H "like an airplane", ("comme un avion"), the size of a typical 
commercial aircraft 
 Page 40 
  


--- PAGE 42 ---
FIELD NAME: DIST  DATA TYPE: Number  
 
Distance from Object 
 
 Where an estimate of the distance from the UFO is reported, the DIST field will contain a 
quantity.  This will be based on the closest approach.  In other words, distance will be assessed in 
terms of the shortest distance reported between the observers and the UFO. The basic purpose 
of the code is to indicate the importance of the sighting, and to indicate the amount of further 
detail that should be expected in the report. 
 
 As is the case with the coding for the estimated size of the UFO, this number is the 
base-2 logarithm of the shortest distance to the object expressed in feet.  For example, a distance 
of 200 feet is coded as "8". A distance of half a mile (2640 feet) is coded "11".  Distances of more 
than a mile are ordinarily not recorded, and distances where the witness actually touches the 
UFO can be coded as "-1". This field was first added to the database in 1998 so most cases lack 
coding for this important attribute.  Codes of estimated distance do not contain any non-numeric 
characters.  Use the following table to convert base-2 logarithms of the estimated distance to the 
UFO to average distances in feet, meters, or miles: 
 
Table 12: Distance from UFO (Log Base-2) 
  
  
DIST N Distance in Feet Meters Miles 
-1 1 .5 ft 15 cm  
0 3 1 ft 0.3 m  
1 2 2 ft 0.6 m  
2 2 4 ft  (3 - 5 ft) 1.2 m  
3 7 8 ft  (6 - 11 ft) 2.4 m  
4 18 16 ft (12 - 22 ft) 5 m  
5 20 32 ft (23 - 45 ft)  10 m  
6 26 64 ft (46 - 90 ft) 20 m  
7 31 128 ft (91 - 180 ft) 39 m  
8 48 256 ft (181 - 361 ft)  78 m  
9 19 512 (362 - 724 ft) 156 m  
10 9 1,028 ft (725 - 1,448 ft)  314 m 1/4 
11 3 2,048 ft (1,449 - 2,896 ft)  627 m 1/2 
12 1 4,096 ft (2,897 - 5,793 ft)   1,248 m 1 
13 1 8,192 (5,794 - 11,585 ft) 2,497 m  2 
14 1 16,384 (11,586 - 23,170 ft) 4,994 m 4 
 Page 41  
  


--- PAGE 43 ---
 FIELD NAME: COLOR  WIDTH: 8 characters 
 
 The COLOR field contains an 8-character abbreviation for the principal color of the UFO 
that was reported.  If more than one object is reported, the principal color of the largest object is 
recorded.  If 2 or more colors are reported, or if the object has multi-colored lights, it is coded as 
"Multi."  Objects described as "reddish orange" are coded as "Orange". If the object changed 
colors that fact will be indicated first as "Changed". The abbreviations include the following – 
 
Table 13: Color of UFO 
 
COLOR N %
  
Aluminum 15 1
Amber 13 1
Beige 2 
Black 40 2
Blue 111 5
BluGray 1 
BluGreen 6 
Bluish 2 
Bright 13 1
Bronze 1 
Brown 8 
Changed 45 2
Chrome 1 
Clear 1 
Copper 2 
Dark 41 2
Fire 61 3
Fluoresc 3 
Glowing 1 
Gold 8 
Gray 98 4
Green 264 12
Luminous 47 2
Metallic 140 6
Multi 220 10
Orange 238 11
Pearl 1 
Phosphor 15 1
Pink 9 
Red 368 16
Rust 2 
Shiny 23 1
Silver 152 7
Tan 2 
Transpar 6 
Violet 11 
 
  
  
  
COLOR N %
  
White 203 9
Yellow 68 3
Zinc 2 
 Page 42 
  


--- PAGE 44 ---
FIELD NAME: SHAPE  WIDTH: 8 characters 
 The SHAPE field contains an 8-character abbreviation for the principal shape of the 
UFO that was reported.  If more than one object is reported, the shape of the largest object is 
recorded. Boomerang shaped UFOs are coded as "V-Shape".  If a UFO changes shape, that 
information takes precedence and is coded as "Polymorf".  Multi-sided objects (hexagons, 
pentagons, octagons, etc.) are all classed together under "Polygon". The abbreviations 
include the following – 
Table 14: Shape of UFO 
SHAPE N % SHAPE N %
Aircraft 7 Hemisphr 1 
Arrow 9 L-Shape 1 
Badge 1 Lampshad 1 
Ball 417 5% Lens 4 
Banana 5 Light 436 5%
Bat 1 Lights 407 5%
Beam 14 Linear 1 
Beehive 2 Lozenge 1 
Blimp 32 MantaRay 3 
Bottle 1 Missile 1 
Bowl 4 Object 97 1%
BowTie 3 Oblong 25 
Box 50 1% Odd 6 
Bulb 3 Orb 12 
Bullet 16 Oval 131 2%
Capsule 2 Ovoid 136 2%
Cigar 360 4% Pear 1 
Circle 4 Polygon 29 
Circular 11 Polymorf 37 
Cloud 5 Pyramid 3 
Cone 52 1% Rectangl 26 
Copter 17 Ring 13
Crescent 128 1% Rocket 1
Cross 6 Round 121 1%
Crown 6 Saturn 5
Cube 1 Schliere 3
Cylinder 61 1% Sparks 1
Delta 110 1% Sphere 26
Diamond 26 Spindle 1
Dirigibl 2 Square 1
Disc 4925 56% Star 2 
DomeDisc 483 6% T-Shape 1 
Dumbell 2 Teardrop 2
Ellipse 58 1% Top 18
Elliptic 1 Torpedo 4
Elongate 7 Triangle 178 2%
FanBlade 1 Tube 1
Fish 2 V-Shape 88 1%
Flare 2 Walnut 3
Flash 1 Wedge 1
Football 22 Wing 5
Fuselage 5 X-Shape 2
Globe 18 Y-Shape 3
 Page 43  
  


--- PAGE 45 ---
FIELD NAME: SOUND  WIDTH: 8 characters 
 
 The SOUND field contains an 8-character abbreviation for the principal sound if any 
reported in the presence of the UFO.  If the UFO was completely silent, the field will be coded 
"NoSound".  This field was first added to the database in 1998 so most of the cases lack 
information about this important attribute.  The abbreviations include the following – 
Table 15: Sound from UFO 
SOUND N % SOUND N %
    
AirCondn 1 Oscillat 1  
Aircraft 4 Popping 1  
Beater 1 Pulsate 4  
Beeping 6 Pulsing 2  
Bloop 2 Purring 2  
Blowing 1 Quake 2  
Boom 8 Rain 3  
Booms 1 Revving 1  
Buzzing 32 1% Roar 19 1% 
Chirring 7 Roaring 3  
Chorus 2 Rumbling 22 1% 
Clack 1 Rustling 1  
Clatter 4 Scraping 3  
Copter 19 1% SewingMa 3  
Crying 1 Shrill 2  
Diesel 1 Sizzling 5  
Drill 2 Sonar 1  
Droning 11 Sputter 4  
ElecMotr 2 Squeaks 1  
Electric 2 Steady 1  
Engine 5 Steam 2  
Explosn 4 Strange 5  
Faint 6 Swishing 10  
FuseBurn 1 Thrashin 1  
Grinding 2 Throb 3  
Growling 2 Thud 1  
Highpitc 10 Thunder 2  
Hissing 39 1% Ticktick 3  
Humming 179 5% Tones 1  
Intense 3 Train 3  
Jet 15 TuneFork 1  
Jets 3 Turbine 5  
Knock 1 Tweeting 1  
Loud 2 Unusual 2  
LoudPop 1 Vacuum 2  
LowHum 10 Whine 17  
Masked 14 Whining 3  
Metallic 2 Whirring 11  
Moaning 2 Whistle 127 4% 
Motor 5 Whooping 1  
Noise 860 25% Whoosh 6  
NoSound 1846 54% Wind 3  
Odd 1 WoooWooo 2  
 Page 44 
  


--- PAGE 46 ---
 
Geographical Coordinates
 
 The purpose of this coding is to provide the computer with precise information from 
which it may determine longitude and latitude.  Precision to the nearest .001 degree will locate 
any point within 50 meters; greater precision seems unnecessary, and may be illusory in most 
regions.  Since the best maps of various areas do not all use the same coordinate system, 
UFOCAT 2002 allows coordinate information to be provided in any of four different systems. 
 
FIELD NAME: LONGITUDE WIDTH: 8 characters 
 
 The LONGITUDE field always contains information related to longitude.  Either a 
decimal point (“. ") or a minute-point (" ' ") will appear in the fifth column.  The number of non-
blank digits indicates the known precision. 
 
FIELD NAME: X3 WIDTH: 1 character 
 
 The field X3 identifies the coordinate system being used.  A blank in X3 implies the 
English System, which is the most common.  In this system there are 360 degrees in a full 
circle, and the meridian of zero longitude passes through Greenwich Observatory, London.  
Fractional degrees may be in either decimals or minutes; any seconds must be manually 
converted and coded as tenths of minutes.  West and North are positive; East and South are 
negative. 
 
 An "M" in X3 implies the French Metric System.  In this system there are 400 degrees 
per full circle, and the meridian of zero longitude passes through Cathedral de Notre Dame, 
Paris.  All fractional degrees are decimal.  West and North are positive; East and South are 
negative.  A "Q" in X3 implies that the coordinates are supposed to be in the English System 
but seem questionable and have not been checked.  An "=" in X3 implies that the coordinates 
are known to be in error. 
 
FIELD NAME: LATITUDE WIDTH: 8 characters 
 
 The LATITUDE field always contains information related to latitude.  Either a decimal 
point or a minute-point will appear in the fifth column of the field. 
 
 The occurrence of letters in both the first two columns of LATITUDE normally implies 
use of the British National Grid System.  In this  system its metric distances locate any point 
east and north from a base-point placed southwest of Land's End, Cornwall.  The two-letter 
code identifies a square 100 kilometers on a side, effectively giving "degrees" from the base-
point.  Fractional "degrees" are measured within the square, from its southwest corner.  Note 
that this results in East longitude being positive; North latitude is positive as usual. 
 Page 45  
  


--- PAGE 47 ---
 
FIELD NAME: NOTES WIDTH: 200 characters 
 
 The NOTES field is included to provide unformatted text describing interesting 
aspects of the UFO report.  The user may use this field to search for key text phrases.  
Because this field was added in 1998, only a small fraction of records contain information, 
and volunteers are needed to update this field. 
 
 The NOTES field may also contain certain explanatory phrases indicating why 
numerical coordinates were not entered for the LONGITUDE and LATITUDE fields.  For 
example -- 
 
 Various Sites  The report includes sightings from more than one location. 
 
 More than One There is more than one place by this name; better information 
is needed. 
 
 No Such Place There is no place having this name; either the report is in 
error or the place-name is fictitious. 
 
 
 
 Page 46 
  